Title: We

Author: Evgenii Ivanovich Zamiatin

Translator: Gregory Zilboorg

Release date: April 27, 2020 [eBook #61963]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Andrew Sly, Mary Glenn Krause, University of
        Michigan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
        made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE ***




Produced by Andrew Sly, Mary Glenn Krause, University of
Michigan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)






EUGENE ZAMIATIN

WE

Authorized Translation from the Russian

  By
  GREGORY ZILBOORG

  New York
  E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
  681 FIFTH AVENUE


  Copyright, 1924
  By E. P. Dutton & Company

_All Rights Reserved_

Printed in the United States of America




FOREWORD


In submitting this book to the American public the translator has
this to say.

The artistic and psychological sides of the novel are hardly to
be discussed in a preface. Great as the art of a writer may be
and profound as his psychology may seem to one, the impression
is largely a matter of individual variations, and this side must
naturally be left to each individual's judgment and sensibilities.

There is, however, one side of the matter which deserves particular
mention and motivated emphasis.

It is perhaps for the first time in the history of the last few
decades that a Russian book, inspired by Russian life, written in
Russia and in the Russian language, should see its first light not
in Russia but abroad, and not in the language it was originally
written but translated into a foreign tongue. During the darkest
years of Russian history, in the 'forties, 'sixties, 'eighties and
'nineties of the last century, many Russian writers were forced by
oppression and reaction to live abroad and to write abroad, yet
their writings would reach Russia, as they were intended primarily
for the Russian reader and Russian life. Most of Turgeniev's novels
were written while he was in France, and with the exception of his
last short story which he dictated on his deathbed, all his novels
and stories were written in Russian. Hertzen, Kropotkin, and at one
time Dostoyevski, were similarly obliged to write while away from
their native land.

Here is a book written by an artist who lived and still lives in
Russia, and whose intimate love for Russia and her suffering is so
great that he finds it impossible to leave Russia even in these
days of stress and sorrow. But his book may not appear in the
country where it was written. It is a great tragedy--this spiritual
loneliness of the artist who cannot speak to his own people. In
bringing out this book in English, the author tries to address
himself to the world without having the opportunity of being heard
by his own people. This situation, however, is to a great extent
symbolic of the spiritual mission of Zamiatin, for no matter what
the language in which he originally writes, and no matter how
typically national his artistic perception and intuition, he is
essentially universal and his vision transcends the boundaries
of a purely national art. Moreover, is it not true that the more
genuinely national a man's art, and the more sincerely national his
personality, the more is he universal? Abraham Lincoln is more than
an American national figure, and I doubt if the appeal Lincoln's
personality makes would be universal as it is if he were not so
typically American. It is difficult to find personalities more
national than Tolstoi or Dostoyevski, and this is perhaps the reason
why they stand out as two of the most typically universal minds with
a universal appeal that the nineteenth century gave us.

Zamiatin is not so great as the men referred to above, but despite
his youth, he already proves to be the bearer of that quality of
greatness which characterizes a personality with a universal appeal.

_We_ is, as Zamiatin himself calls it, the most jocular and the
most earnest thing he has thus far written. It is a novel that
puts most poignantly and earnestly before every thoughtful reader
the most difficult problem that exists today in the civilized
world,--the problem of preservation of the independent original
creative personality. Our civilization today depends upon the
energetic movement of great masses of people. Wars, revolutions,
general strikes--all these phenomena involve great masses, large
groups, enormous mobs. Despite the fact that there is hardly a
corner in the world today where the average man does not make the
trite complaint, "What we need is leadership," the world today
seems for a time at least to have lost its capacity for producing
real leaders. For our great successes in mechanical civilization,
our exceptional efforts in efficiency, tend to bring into play
large numbers rather than great individualities. What under these
conditions is the lot of a creative individuality? What the tragedy
of an independent spirit under present conditions is, is pointed
out in an unique way in _We_. The problem of creative individuality
versus mob is today not a mere Russian problem. It is as poignant
under Bolshevist dictatorship as it is in Ford's factory.

Of course the sincere, honest and frank treatment of this problem
seems offensive to anyone who prefers to be a member of a mob or
keep this or that part of humanity in the state of a mob. That
is why _We_ could not see light in Russia, and will probably be
disliked by those whose spiritual activities are reduced to the
mechanical standards of a mechanical civilization which is devoid of
original creative effort.

A few words about the method by which Zamiatin tries to drive home
to the reader his main ideas. It is the method of "Laughter through
tears," to use an old expression of Gogol. It is the form which is
dictated by profound love for humanity, mixed with pity and hatred
of those factors which are the cause of the disindividualization of
man today. It is the old emotion of the ancient Catul: "Odi et amo."
Zamiatin laughs in order to hide his tears, hence amusing as _We_
may seem and really is, it barely conceals a profound human tragedy
which is universal today.

The reader may be interested in knowing something about Zamiatin
himself. Zamiatin does not like to tell about himself and the
translator does not think he has the right to tell more than to
quote Zamiatin's own answer to a request addressed to him a couple
of years ago to write his autobiography:

"I see you want my autobiography by all means, but I assure you
that you will have to limit yourself only to an outside inspection
and get but a glimpse, perhaps, into the dark windows. I seldom ask
anybody to enter.

"As to the outside, you will see a lonely child without playmates,
lying on a Turkish divan, hind-side up, reading a book, or under
the grand piano while his mother plays Chopin. Two steps away from
Chopin, just outside the window with the geraniums, in the middle of
the street, there is a small pig tied to a stake and hens fluttering
in the dust.

"If you are interested in the geography, here it is--Lebedyan, in
the most Russian Tambov province about which Tolstoi and Turgeniev
wrote so much. Chronology?--The end of the 'eighties and early
'nineties, then Voronesh, the _Gymnasium pension_, boredom and rabid
dogs on Main Street. One of these dogs got me by the leg. At that
time I loved to make different experiments on myself, and I decided
to wait and see whether I would or would not get the rabies and what
is most important, I was very curious: What would I feel when the
time would come for the rabies (about two weeks after the bite)? I
felt a great many things, but two weeks later I did not get the
rabies, therefore I announced to the inspector in the school that I
got the rabies and must go at once to Moscow for vaccination.

"In the _Gymnasium_ I would get _A plus_ for composition and was
not always on good terms with mathematics. Perhaps because of that
(sheer stubbornness) I chose the most mathematical career--the
ship-building department of the Petrograd Polytech.

"Thirteen years ago in the month of May--and that May was remarkable
in that the snow covered the flowers--I simultaneously finished my
work for my diploma and my first short story. The short story was
published in the old _Obrazovanye_.

"Well, what else do you want? That meant that I was going to write
short stories and was going to publish them. Therefore for the
following three years I wrote about nothing but ice cutters, steam
engines, refillers and 'The Theoretical Exploration of the Works of
Floating Steam Shovels.' I couldn't help myself. I was attached to
the chair of Ship Architecture and busied myself with teaching in
the ship-building faculty, where I teach until now.

"If I mean anything in Russian Literature, I owe this completely to
the Petrograd Secret Service. In 1911 this service exiled me from
Petrograd and I was forced to spend two years in a non-populated
place in Lachta. There, in the midst of the white winter silence
and the green summer silence, I wrote my _Provincial_. After that
the late Ismaylov expressed in print his belief that I wore very
high boots and was a long-haired provincial type, carrying a heavy
stick, and he was later very much surprised that I 'didn't look a
bit like that.' Incidentally, 'not a bit like that' I became in
England where, during the War, I spent about two years, building
ships and visiting the ruins of ancient castles. I listened to the
banging of the German Zeppelin bombs and wrote a short novel _The
Islanders_.

"I regret immensely that I did not witness the Russian Revolution
in February and know only the October Revolution, because it was in
October, a life preserver around my body and all the lights out,
passing German submarines, that I returned to Petrograd. Because
of this I felt like one who never having been in love gets up one
morning and finds himself married about ten years.

"Now I write little, perhaps because my requirements towards myself
become greater. Three new volumes are in the hands of the publisher
and begin to be published only now. The fourth will be my novel
_We_, the funniest and most earnest thing I have written. However,
the most serious and most interesting novels I never wrote. They
happened to me in my life."

  * * *

Zamiatin continues to live in Russia and continues to live with
Russia, but such is the sarcasm of Fate that the first Russian
novel giving a real synthesis of the Russian revolution and its
greater universal meaning, this novel written by Zamiatin, should
remain unknown to the Russians in Russia.

  Gregory Zilboorg.
  _New York_, 1924.




CONTENTS
                                                                  page

 Foreword                                     Gregory Zilboorg       v

 Record
   1. An Announcement--The Wisest of Lines--A Poem                   1
   2. Ballet--Square Harmony--X                                      4
   3. A Coat--A Wall--The Tables                                    12
   4. The Wild Man with the Barometer--Epilepsy--If                 18
   5. The Square--The Rulers of the World--An Agreeable and
        Useful Function                                             24
   6. An Accident--The Cursed "It's Clear"--Twenty-four Hours       28
   7. An Eyelash--Taylor--Henbane and Lily of the Valley            38
   8. An Irrational Root--R-13--The Triangle                        46
   9. Liturgy--Iambus--The Cast-Iron Hand                           53
  10. A Letter--A Membrane--Hairy I                                 59
  11. No, I Can't; Let It Be without Headings!                      70
  12. The Delimitation of the Infinite--Angel--Meditations
        on Poetry                                                   77
  13. Fog--Thou--A Decidedly Absurd Adventure                       83
  14. "Mine"--Impossible--A Cold Floor                              91
  15. The Bell--The Mirror-Like Sea--I am to Burn Eternally         95
  16. Yellow--A Two-dimensional Shadow--An Incurable Soul          102
  17. Through Glass--I Died--The Corridor                          111
  18. Logical Debris--Wounds and Plaster--Never Again              121
  19. The Infinitesimal of the Third Order--From Under the
        Forehead--Over the Railing                                 130
  20. Discharge--The Material of an Idea--The Zero Rock            139
  21. The Duty of an Author--The Ice-swells--The Most Difficult
        Love                                                       144
  22. The Benumbed Waves--Everything is Improving--I Am a Microbe  152
  23. Flowers--The Dissolution of a Crystal--If Only (?)           158
  24. The Limit of the Function--Easter--To Cross Out Everything   165
  25. The Descent from Heaven--The Greatest Catastrophe in
        History--The Known--Is Ended                               171
  26. The World Does Exist--Rash--Forty-one Degrees Centigrade     181
  27. No Headings. It Is Impossible                                187
  28. Both of Them--Entropy and Energy--The Opaque Part of
        the Body                                                   196
  29. Threads of the Face--Sprouts--An Unnatural Compression       207
  30. The Last Number--Galileo's Mistake--Would It Not Be Better   211
  31. The Great Operation--I Forgave Everything--The Collision
        of Trains                                                  217
  32. I Do Not Believe--Tractors--A Little Human Splinter          228
  33. This without a Synopsis, Hastily, the Last                   237
  34. The Forgiven Ones--A Sunny Night--A Radio-Walkryie           239
  35. In a Ring--A Carrot--A Murder                                251
  36. Empty Pages--The Christian God--About My Mother              260
  37. Infusorian--Doomsday--Her Room                               266
  38. I Don't Know What Title--Perhaps the Whole Synopsis May Be
        Called a Cast-off Cigarette-Butt                           272
  39. The End                                                      276
  40. Facts--The Bell--I Am Certain                                284




WE




RECORD ONE

  An Announcement
  The Wisest of Lines
  A Poem


This is merely a copy, word by word, of what was published this
morning in the State newspaper:

"In another hundred and twenty days the building of the _Integral_
will be completed. The great historic hour is near, when the first
_Integral_ will rise into the limitless space of the universe. A
thousand years ago your heroic ancestors subjected the whole earth
to the power of the United State. A still more glorious task is
before you,--the integration of the indefinite equation of the
Cosmos by the use of the glass, electric, fire-breathing _Integral_.
Your mission is to subjugate to the grateful yoke of reason the
unknown beings who live on other planets, and who are perhaps still
in the primitive state of freedom. If they will not understand that
we are bringing them a mathematically faultless happiness, our duty
will be to force them to be happy. But before we take up arms, we
shall try the power of words.

"In the name of The Well-Doer, the following is announced herewith
to all Numbers of the United State:

"Whoever feels capable must consider it his duty to write treatises,
poems, manifestoes, odes and other compositions on the greatness and
the beauty of the United State.

"This will be the first load which the _Integral_ will carry.

"Long live the United State! Long live the Numbers!! Long live the
Well-Doer!!!"

I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. To integrate the
colossal, universal equation! To unbend the wild curve, to
straighten it out to a tangent--to a straight line! For the United
State is a straight line, a great, divine, precise, wise line, the
wisest of lines!

I, D-503, the builder of the _Integral_, I am only one of the many
mathematicians of the United State. My pen, which is accustomed to
figures, is unable to express the march and rhythm of consonance;
therefore I shall try to record only the things I see, the things
I think, or to be more exact, the things _we_ think. Yes, we; that
is exactly what I mean, and "We" shall, therefore, be the title of
my records. But this will only be a derivative of our life,--of our
mathematical, perfect life in the United State. If this be so, will
not this derivative be a poem in itself, despite my limitations? It
will. I believe, I know it.

I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. I feel something
similar to what a woman probably feels when for the first time she
senses within herself the pulse of a tiny, blind, human being. It
is I, and at the same time it is not I. And for many long months it
will be necessary to feed it with my life, with my blood, and then
with a pain at my heart, to tear it from myself and lay it at the
feet of the United State.

Yet I am ready, as everyone, or nearly everyone of us, is. I am
ready.




RECORD TWO

  Ballet
  Square Harmony
  X


Spring. From behind the Green Wall from some unknown plains the
wind brings to us the yellow honeyed pollen of flowers. One's lips
are dry from this sweet dust. Every moment one passes one's tongue
over them. Probably, all women whom I meet in the street (and men
certainly also), have today sweet lips. This disturbs somewhat my
logical thinking. But the sky! The sky is blue. Its limpidness is
not marred by a single cloud. (How primitive was the taste of the
ancients, since their poets were always inspired by these senseless,
formless, stupidly rushing accumulations of steam!) I love, I am
sure it will not be an error if I say we love, only such a sky--a
sterile, faultless sky. On such days the whole universe seems to be
moulded of the same eternal glass, like the Green Wall, and like all
our buildings. On such days one sees into the very blue depth of
things. One sees their wonderful equations, hitherto unknown. One
sees them in everything, even in the most ordinary everyday things.

Here is an example: this morning I was on the dock where the
_Integral_ is being built, and I saw the lathes; blindly, with
abandon, the balls of the regulators were rotating; the cranks
were swinging from side to side with a glimmer; the working-beam
proudly swung its shoulder; and the mechanical chisels were dancing
to the melody of an unheard Tarantella. I suddenly perceived all
the music, all the beauty, of this colossal, of this mechanical
ballet, illumined by light blue rays of sunshine. Then the thought
came: why beautiful? Why is a dance beautiful? Answer: because it
is an _unfree_ movement. Because the deep meaning of the dance
is contained in its absolute, ecstatic submission, in the ideal
_non-freedom_. If it is true that our ancestors would abandon
themselves in dancing at the most inspired moments of their lives
(religious mysteries, military parades) then it means only one
thing: the instinct of non-freedom has been characteristic of human
nature from ancient times, and we in our life of today, we are only
consciously--

I was interrupted. The switchboard clicked. I raised my eyes,--O-90,
of course! In half a minute she herself will be here to take me for
the walk.

Dear O--! She always seems to me to look like her name, O--. She is
approximately ten centimeters shorter than the required Maternal
Norm. Therefore she appears all round; the rose-colored O of her
lips is open to meet every word of mine. She has a round soft dimple
on her wrist. Children have such dimples. As she came in, the
logical fly-wheel was still buzzing in my head, and following its
inertia, I began to tell her about my new formula which embraced the
machines and the dancers and all of us.

"Wonderful, isn't it!" I asked.

"Yes, wonderful ... Spring!" she replied, with a rosy smile.

You see? Spring! She talks about Spring! Females!... I became
silent.

We were down in the street. The avenue was crowded. On days when
the weather is so beautiful the afternoon personal hour is usually
the hour of the supplementary walk. As always the big Musical Tower
was playing with all its pipes, the March of the United State.
The Numbers, hundreds, thousands of Numbers in light blue unifs
(probably a derivative of the ancient _uniform_) with golden badges
on the chest,--the State number of each one, male or female,--the
Numbers were walking slowly, four abreast, exaltedly keeping
the step. I, we four, were but one of the innumerable waves of
a powerful torrent. To my left, O-90 (if one of my long-haired
ancestors were writing this a thousand years ago, he would probably
call her by that funny word, _mine_), to my right, two unknown
Numbers, a she-Number and a he-Number.

Blue sky, tiny baby suns in each one of our badges; our faces are
unclouded by the insanity of thoughts. Rays.... Do you picture it?
Everything seems to be made of a kind of smiling, a ray-like matter.
And the brass measures: Tra-ta-ta-tam.... Tra-ta-ta-tam ... stamping
on the brassy steps which sparkle in the sun; with every step you
rise higher and higher into the dizzy blue heights.... Then, as this
morning on the dock, again I saw as if for the first time in my
life, the impeccably straight streets, the glistening glass of the
pavement, the divine parallelopipeds of the transparent dwellings,
the square harmony of the grayish-blue rows of Numbers. And it
seemed to me that not past generations, but I myself, had won a
victory over the old god and the old life, that I myself had created
all this. I felt like a tower: I was afraid to move my elbow, lest
the walls, the cupola and the machines should fall to pieces.

Then without warning--a jump through centuries: I remembered
(apparently through an association by contrast) a picture in
the museum, a picture of an avenue of the twentieth century,
a thundering many-colored confusion of men, wheels, animals,
bill-boards, trees, colors, and birds.... They say all this once
actually existed!

It seemed to me so incredible, so absurd, that I lost control of
myself and laughed aloud. A laugh, as if an echo of mine, reached my
ear from the right. I turned. I saw white, very white, sharp teeth,
and an unfamiliar female face.

"I beg your pardon," she said, "but you looked about you like an
inspired mythological god on the seventh day of creation. You look
as though you are sure that I, too, was created by you, by no one
but you. It is very flattering."

All this without a smile, even with a certain degree of respect--(she
may know that I am the builder of the _Integral_). In her eyes
nevertheless, in her brows, there was a strange irritating X, and
I was unable to grasp it, to find an arithmetical expression for
it. Somehow I was confused; with a somewhat hazy mind, I tried
logically to motivate my laughter.

"It was absolutely clear that this contrast, this impassable abyss,
between the things of today and of years ago--"

"But why impassable?" (What bright, sharp teeth!) "One might throw a
bridge over that abyss. Please imagine: a drum battalion, rows,--all
this existed before and consequently--"

"Oh, yes, it is clear," I exclaimed.

It was a remarkable intersection of thoughts. She said almost in
the same words the things I wrote down before the walk! Do you
understand? Even the thoughts! It is because nobody is _one_, but
_one of_. We are all so much alike--