Title: Presidential addresses and State papers (Vol. 1)

Author: Theodore Roosevelt

Release date: October 13, 2024 [eBook #74572]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Review of Reviews Company

Credits: A Marshall and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESSES AND STATE PAPERS (VOL. 1) ***


  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.

  The original edition did not include a Table of Contents. For the
  convenience of the reader one has been created:


  Introduction                                                       i

  The Presidency                                                     1

  Addresses and State Papers                                        14

    Speech of President Roosevelt at the Reunion of the Department
       Of the Potomac, G. A. R., at the New Willard Hotel,
       Washington, D.⁠ C., Feb. 19, 1902                             14

    At the Charleston Exposition, Wednesday, April 9, 1902          18

    At New York at the Banquet at Sherry’s in Honor of Dr. Nicholas
       Murray Butler, President of Columbia University,
       April 19, 1902                                               27

    To the Graduating Class, Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md.,
       May 2, 1902                                                  33

    At the Banquet of the Society of the Sons of the American
       Revolution, Washington, D.⁠ C., May 2, 1902                   36

    At the Laying of the Cornerstone of the McKinley Memorial Ohio
       College of Government of the American University,
       Washington, D.⁠ C., May 14, 1902                              39

    At the Exercises of the Society of the Army of the Cumberland,
       Attending the Reburial of Major-general William Stark
       Rosecrans, Arlington National Cemetery, Washington, D.⁠ C.,
       May 17, 1902                                                 40

    At the Centennial Meeting of the Board of Home Missions of the
       Presbyterian Church, Carnegie Hall, New York, N. Y., on the
       Evening of May 20, 1902                                      44

    At the Overflow Meeting of the Centennial of Presbyterian Home
       Missions, Central Presbyterian Church, New York, N. Y.,
       May 20, 1902                                                 50

    On the Occasion of the Unveiling of the Soldiers’ and Sailors’
       Monument at Arlington, Under the Auspices of the National
       Society of the Colonial Dames of America, May 21, 1902       53

    At Arlington, Memorial Day, May 30, 1902                        56

    At the Opening Session of the Military Surgeons’ Association,
    Washington, D. C., June 5, 1902                                 68

    At the Centennial Celebration of the Establishment of the United
    States Military Academy, West Point, June 11, 1902              70

    At the Harvard Commencement Dinner, Cambridge, Mass.,
       June 25, 1902                                                78

    At the Coliseum, Hartford, Conn., August 22, 1902               85

    At Providence, R. I., August 23, 1902                           98

    At Symphony Hall, Boston, August 25, 1902                      108

    At Haverhill, Mass., August 26, 1902                           118

    At Portland, Maine, August 26, 1902                            122

    At Augusta, Maine, August 26, 1902                             124

    At Bangor, Maine, August 27, 1902                              126

    At Northfield, Mass., September 1, 1902                        134

    At Fitchburg, Mass., September 2, 1902                         137

    At Dalton, Mass., September 3, 1902                            144

    At Wheeling, W. Va., September 6, 1902                         146

    To the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, Chattanooga, Tenn.,
       September 8, 1902                                           156

    At Danville, Va., September 9, 1902                            167

    At Music Hall, Cincinnati, Ohio, on the Evening of
        September 20, 1902                                         169

    At the Banquet of the Spanish War Veterans, Detroit, Mich.,
    September 22, 1902                                             185

    At Logansport, Ind., September 23, 1902                        187

    At the Banquet of the Chamber of Commerce of the State of
       New York, at New York, November 11, 1902                    196

    At the Banquet Tendered General Luke E. Wright, at
       Memphis, Tenn., November 19, 1902                           202

    At the Reception to General Wright at Memphis, Tenn.,
       November 19, 1902                                           208

    At the Founders’ Day Banquet of the Union League,
       Philadelphia, Pa., November 22, 1902                        211

    At the Banquet to Justice Harlan, the New Willard Hotel,
       Washington, D.⁠ C., December 9, 1902                         221

    Reception of a Delegation from the National Board of Trade,
       Washington, D.⁠ C., January 15, 1903                         225

    At the Banquet of the Young Men’s Christian Association, New
       Willard Hotel, Washington, D.⁠ C., Jan. 19, 1903             226

    At the Banquet at Canton, Ohio, January 27, 1903, in Honor of
       the Birthday of the Late President McKinley                 231

    At Carnegie Hall, New York, N. Y., February 26, 1903, Upon the
       Occasion of the Bi-centennial Celebration of the Birth of
       John Wesley                                                 242

    At a Meeting of the Society of American Foresters, Held at the
       Residence of Mr. Gifford Pinchot, Washington, D.⁠ C.,
       March 26, 1903                                              249

    At Chicago, Ill., April 2, 1903                                257

    At Waukesha, Wis., April 3, 1903                               268

    At Milwaukee, Wis., April 3, 1903                              272

    Before the Minnesota Legislature, St. Paul, Minn.,
      April 4, 1903                                                286

    In the Chapel of the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
       Minn., April 4, 1903                                        292

    At Minneapolis, Minn., April 4, 1903                           294

    At Sioux Falls, S. D., April 6, 1903                           302

    At Fargo, North Dakota, April 7, 1903                          310

    At Medora, North Dakota, April 7, 1903                         320

    At Jamestown, N. D., April 7, 1903                             321

    At Laying of Cornerstone of Gateway to Yellowstone National
       Park, Gardiner, Montana, April 24, 1903                     324

    At Omaha, Neb., April 27, 1903                                 329

    From Address at Quincy, Ill., April 29, 1903                   335

    At Odeon Hall, St. Louis, Mo., Before the National and
       International Good Roads Convention, April 29, 1903         336

    At St. Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, April 29, 1903   341

    At the Dedication Ceremonies of the Louisiana Purchase
       Exposition, St. Louis, April 30, 1903                       341

    At Topeka, Kansas, May 1, 1903                                 353

    From Address at Denver, Col., May 4, 1903                      361

    At Santa Fe, New Mexico, May 5, 1903                           364

    At the Catholic School, Albuquerque, N. M., May 5, 1903        368

    At the Indian School, Albuquerque, N. M., May 5, 1903          368

    At Grand Canyon, Arizona, May 6, 1903                          369

    At Barstow, California, May 7, 1903                            372

    At San Bernardino, Cal., May 7, 1903                           373

    At the Big Tree Grove, Santa Cruz, Cal., May 11, 1903          375

    At Leland Stanford Junior University, Palo Alto, Cal.,
       May 12, 1903                                                377

    At Mechanics’ Pavilion, San Francisco, Cal., May 13, 1903      390

    At the Ceremonies Incident to the Breaking of Sod For the
       Erection of a Monument in Memory of the Late President
       McKinley, San Francisco, Cal., May 13, 1903                 397




[Illustration: COPYRIGHT—UNDERWOOD & UNDERWOOD, N. Y.

                        _A CALIFORNIA SPEECH_

  _Some of President Roosevelt’s addresses on public questions called
  him across the continent. However, he always transacted an enormous
  amount of public business en route_ ]




                        Homeward Bound Edition

                        PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESSES
                           AND STATE PAPERS

                 _February 19, 1902, to May 13, 1903_

                                  BY

                          THEODORE ROOSEVELT

                      [Illustration: (colophon)]

                 PUBLISHED WITH THE PERMISSION OF THE
                  AUTHOR THROUGH SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT

                               VOLUME I


                               NEW YORK

                     THE REVIEW OF REVIEWS COMPANY

                                 MCMX




 The Publishers desire to make clear to the readers that Ex-president
  Roosevelt retains no pecuniary interest in the sale of the volumes
  containing these speeches. He feels that the material contained in
   these addresses has been dedicated to the public, and that it is,
  therefore, not to be handled as copyrighted material from which Mr.
            Roosevelt should receive any pecuniary return.




                        PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESSES
                           AND STATE PAPERS

                           FEBRUARY 19, 1902

                                  TO

                             MAY 13, 1903




INTRODUCTION

BY ALBERT SHAW


The materials contained in the Addresses and State Papers of Theodore
Roosevelt, while President of the United States, possess far more than
a transitory interest and value. It is obvious indeed that for the
future student of American politics and history their preservation in
convenient and authentic form is not merely an important service, but
an indispensable one; for it would have been impossible to collate
them in any accurate or complete way from the scattered files of
newspapers, especially since many of the addresses were delivered
at points remote from news centers, and some of these were very
inadequately reported by the press. This observation, it is needless
to say, does not apply to the formal State Papers—chiefly messages
to Congress—for such official deliverances are duly preserved and
published by the Government itself. It is, however, suitable as well
as convenient to include these State Papers in a collection of the
recent utterances of President Roosevelt, for reasons so obvious as to
need little comment.

The palpable fact is that President Roosevelt’s messages to Congress
and a large number of his speeches, delivered in various parts of
the country in his capacity as President, pertain to the same topics
and serve a like public purpose. The messages must, of course, deal
with matters affecting the welfare of the nation, and with various
questions of public business or policy, in those aspects that bear
upon the work of Congress. It is the President’s Constitutional right
and duty to present information upon such topics, or to expound
them from the standpoint of the Administration. In the long series
of Presidential messages one may, indeed, read the history of this
country for more than a hundred years. To that official narrative
these messages by Mr. Roosevelt add some of the most fascinating
chapters.

The speeches here collected, on the other hand, have a much wider
range. Nevertheless, a great number of the addresses and speeches do
in fact deal with precisely the same topics as those presented in the
messages to Congress, and were intended not merely for a particular
audience but for the whole country through the medium of the press.
And for Mr. Roosevelt’s full disclosure of his views and policies
touching some questions of large public concern, it is necessary to
read his speeches in connection with his general or special messages
to Congress. Since a number of his speeches here printed, like his
general messages, deal with a variety of matters, the reader who
wishes to compare and collate his utterances upon a given subject—as,
for example, the regulation of the trusts, the reorganization of the
army, the relations of the United States to Cuba, or our methods and
policies of administration in the Philippines—will find it desirable
to consult the index, which is intended to make these volumes
available for ready reference.

Quite apart from their obvious value for reference purposes to the
student of our contemporary history and politics, or to the campaign
speaker of one party or another—who may wish to know authoritatively
what Mr. Roosevelt said about various public issues—this collection of
addresses has several distinct merits and advantages that must give it
a place among works relating to the national life and character. Mr.
Roosevelt, as an exponent of the aims and ideals of a great portion
of his own generation of men and women in the United States, stands
unquestionably first. In two volumes of his previously collected
essays and papers, one entitled _American Ideals_ and the other _The
Strenuous Life_, both of which are included in the present edition
of his works, Mr. Roosevelt has expressed with remarkable vigor,—as
well as with an unwavering conviction and a wholesome philosophy
of work and courage,—those views of politics, citizenship, and
organized social and economic life to which the best conscience and
intelligence of his fellow-countrymen have made sympathetic response.
These essays, it is true, set forth no abstract scheme of political or
social philosophy. Yet out of them there might be evolved a systematic
body of doctrine relating to the duties of citizenship in a democracy,
and to the ethics of administration and government. The explanation
is that the doctrines and principles have come to be embodied in the
character and convictions of the man himself; and thus the essays
and addresses have not been the mere intellectual products of a man
addicted to the use of the pen or to the phrasing of sentences, but
rather the direct and wellnigh spontaneous expression of Mr. Roosevelt
in relation to topics rendered timely by events and occasions.

In like manner and in an even higher sense, these later speeches,
made under the sobering sense of responsibility that must come with
the holding of so great an office as the Presidency, express Mr.
Roosevelt’s convictions respecting our American life and citizenship
in such manner as to form a sort of record for the study of the
psychology of the nation at the beginning of the twentieth century.

Furthermore, these addresses and public papers, while to some extent
homely, unstudied and unconventional in their phraseology, have the
quality of permanent literature in a much higher measure than the
utterances of almost any other American public man of our time.
The traditional American political oratory is highly stilted and
artificial—overloaded with rhetoric and figures of speech, lacking
vernacular force and directness. While the orotund and rhetorical
method of the past has largely disappeared, there has followed it
another method almost equally artificial, in which the stately periods
of the old-fashioned orator have been succeeded by the illustrative
amusing anecdote, the highly burnished witticism, and the pointed
phrase or apothegm.

Mr. Roosevelt’s method is wholly different from either of these.
Except for being at times a trifle more earnest and hortatory, it is
the method of some of the best contemporary English speakers. They do
not posture, and do not attempt to be either orators or mere platform
entertainers. Rather, they prefer to state in a direct, conversational
manner certain things that they wish to say. Their language is that
which naturally, and without conscious effort, clothes their thoughts
as men of culture and mature intellectual life. Mr. Roosevelt being a
man of trained mind, strong conviction, historical knowledge, and wide
public experience, combined with great practical energy and executive
force, and buoyant physical health, has both his own opinions and his
own ready and forcible way of expressing them.

Thus many of the speeches contained in this collection are as nearly
extemporaneous utterances as any which have ever been put into
similarly permanent form. Here are addresses made in almost every
State and Territory of the Union; and they were prepared and delivered
within a very short range of time, during which a far greater number
of briefer and more casual speeches have been made, thousands of
letters written, and innumerable statements upon matters of a public
character addressed to the Cabinet (collectively and individually), to
Senators and members of Congress, to various executive officials, to
public men and citizens from every part of every State of the Union,
to committees and deputations representing all classes and interests,
and to representatives and visitors from all countries—whether a royal
prince from Germany or a defeated Boer general from South Africa.
And when one considers all these demands upon a President’s time,
and knows something of the prodigious industry with which the Chief
Executive must devote himself to the almost innumerable duties that
present themselves daily in connection with his executive work, it
becomes plain that these speeches and addresses have been in the main
the spontaneous utterances of a richly stored mind inspired by firm
conviction and resolute will, and supported by extraordinary physical
strength and vigor.

Yet Mr. Roosevelt’s speeches have not been carelessly prepared. Nor
have they ever been left—as some speakers profess to leave theirs—to
the “inspiration of the moment.” Mr. Roosevelt has unusual powers
of concentration; and his achievement of so much work is due to his
ability to turn promptly from one thing to another and to give each
successive task his whole undivided attention. With an excellent
memory and a disciplined mind, he is able to summon to his aid at a
given moment all his past resources of reading, study, and thought
upon a given topic. Thus, before going on several of the long trips
in connection with which a great number of addresses in these volumes
were made, the more important of the speeches for which dates had been
fixed were dictated one after another to his stenographers late in
the evening when the day’s work was cleared away, social or official
guests had departed, and an hour or two of uninterrupted time was at
his disposal.

This, indeed, is the same method by which a number of the essays and
addresses which have become familiar in the collected volumes entitled
_American Ideals_, and _The Strenuous Life_, had been prepared at
former periods when Mr. Roosevelt was under stress of much occupation.
There has been no attempt to polish sentences or to make fine phrases,
yet there is the orderly and the deliberate expression that results
from orderly processes of thinking. And there is the assured and
confident tone that reveals a steadfast mind seldom tormented by
doubts or misgivings.

Again, it is to be noted that these addresses are patriotic rather
than partisan, and that where they deal with matters of controversy
they show a spirit as little contentious or polemic as possible. While
believing in the utility of the party system, Mr. Roosevelt spoke as
President of the whole country and not merely as the chief of a party.
His speeches, in short, are the utterances of a man who embodies the
national spirit more broadly and fully than almost any other man of
his day. He expresses himself upon a wide range of topics with a
larger fund of experience and direct knowledge than is possessed by
any other conspicuous public man of either party.

It is only through some understanding of the career that led up to
his assumption of the Presidency that the richness, the fulness, and
the authoritative quality of his observations on many varied themes
can be appreciated. Mr. Roosevelt’s life has, amid much variety,
possessed great unity. While still in college at Harvard, his mind
became centered upon the study of American life, American history, and
American government and policy. Whatever he undertook after leaving
college added steadily to his understanding of the people of his own
country and their institutions. Almost at once he threw himself into
the politics of the great State of New York, served several terms in
the Legislature, and made himself known throughout the country by the
vigor and courage with which he applied himself to current problems
of State and municipal reform. At a time when the so-called “spoils
system” was powerfully rooted in the practical government of nation,
State, and city, he became a civil service reformer.

Everything that was worth while was of interest to him and everything
that he undertook to do was done whole-heartedly and thus made its
contribution to his own development. He was an officer in the militia,
and learned lessons which became, years afterward, valuable to him as
a colonel in the Spanish-American war and later as commander-in-chief
of the army by virtue of the Presidential office.

Meanwhile his first literary undertaking was the history of the
naval war of 1812, which appeared in 1882, and which will always
remain a vital and standard account of our last war with Great
Britain, especially from the standpoint of naval strategy and actual
operations. Whether taking part himself in the current life of his
country and in the making of its history, or whether studying or
writing about the part that others have taken in the development of
the nation, there has been on Mr. Roosevelt’s part always a singleness
of purpose and a harmony of effort. Thus, when he wrote about the War
of 1812, as when in later years he wrote the graphic yet accurate
and well-poised studies of those Western movements, military and
civil, that created the Mississippi Valley (comprised in the series
of volumes entitled _The Winning of the West_), there was on his
part just as much a sense of dealing with realities as when in 1899
he wrote out the story of the part played by his regiment of Rough
Riders in the Spanish-American war of the year before. This single
work, on _The Winning of the West_, in the opinion of the authorities,
justified the honorary degree conferred upon Colonel Roosevelt by the
University of Norway on May 6, 1910.

The circumstances which took him to the West in 1884 to become for
some years a cattle ranchman, a resident of the great plains, and
an exponent of hunting and frontier life, involved in no manner an
interruption of the career upon which he had made so propitious an
entrance. On the contrary, this was the best possible step that could
have been taken for the rounding out and development of the career of
a man destined, either in letters or in action, to spend his life in
dealing with American affairs from a broad standpoint.

Many of the most marked traits of the American people have been