Title: Uncle Wiggily's Adventures

Author: Howard Roger Garis

Illustrator: Louis Wisa

Release date: March 7, 2005 [eBook #15281]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Clare Boothby, David Newman, Emmy and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team.(https://www.pgdp.net)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNCLE WIGGILY'S ADVENTURES ***




Produced by Clare Boothby, David Newman, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(https://www.pgdp.net)








UNCLE WIGGILY'S
ADVENTURES

By
HOWARD R. GARIS

_Author of "Sammie and Susie Littletail," "Johnnie and Billie
Bushytail." "Lulu, Alice and Jimmie Wibblewobble,"
"Jackie and Peetie Bow-Wow," "Those Smith
Boys," "The Island Boys" etc._

Illustrations by

LOUIS WISA

A.L. BURT COMPANY

PUBLISHERS        NEW YORK

THE FAMOUS

BED TIME SERIES

Five groups of books, intended for reading
aloud to the little folks each night. Each
volume contains 8 colored illustrations, 31
stories, one for each day of the month. Handsomely
bound in cloth. Size 6-1/2 x 8-1/4.

HOWARD R. GARIS


=Bed Time Animal Stories=

No.  1.  SAMMIE AND SUSIE LITTLETAIL
No.  2.  JOHNNY AND BILLY BUSHYTAIL
No.  3.  LULU, ALICE & JIMMIE WIBBLEWOBBLE
No.  5.  JACKIE AND PEETIE BOW-WOW
No.  7.  BUDDY AND BRIGHTEYES PIGG
No.  9.  JOIE, TOMMIE AND KITTIE KAT
No. 10   CHARLIE AND ARABELLA CHICK
No. 14   NEDDIE AND BECKIE STUBTAIL
No. 16   BULLY AND BAWLY NO-TAIL
No. 20   NANNIE AND BILLIE WAGTAIL
No. 28   JOLLIE AND JILLIE LONGTAIL


=Uncle Wiggily Bed Time Stories=


No.  4 UNCLE WIGGILY'S ADVENTURES
No.  6 UNCLE WIGGILY'S TRAVELS
No.  8 UNCLE WIGGILY'S FORTUNE
No. 11 UNCLE WIGGILY'S AUTOMOBILE
No. 19 UNCLE WIGGILY AT THE SEASHORE
No. 21 UNCLE WIGGILY'S AIRSHIP
No. 27 UNCLE WIGGILY IN THE COUNTRY

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt
of price by the publishers

=A.L. BURT CO., 114-120 East 23d St., New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

COPYRIGHT, 1912 By
R.F. FENNO & COMPANY
_Uncle Wiggily's Adventures_




=UNCLE WIGGILY'S ADVENTURES=




STORY I

UNCLE WIGGILY STARTS OFF


Uncle Wiggily Longears, the nice old gentleman rabbit, hopped out of bed
one morning and started to go to the window, to see if the sun was
shining. But, no sooner had he stepped on the floor, than he cried out:

"Oh! Ouch! Oh, dear me and a potato pancake! Oh, I believe I stepped on a
tack! Sammie Littletail must have left it there! How careless of him!"

You see this was the same Uncle Wiggily, of whom I have told you in the
Bedtime Books--the very same Uncle Wiggily. He was an Uncle to Sammie and
Susie Littletail, the rabbit children, and also to Billie and Johnnie
Bushytail, the squirrel boys, and to Alice and Lulu and Jimmie
Wibblewobble, the duck children, and I have written for you, books about
all those characters. Now I thought I would write something just about
Uncle Wiggily himself, though of course I'll tell you what all his nephews
and nieces did, too.

Well, when Uncle Wiggily felt that sharp pain, he stood still for a
moment, and wondered what could have happened.

"Yes, I'm almost sure it was a tack," he said. "I must pick it up so no
one else will step on it."

So Uncle Wiggily looked on the floor, but there was no tack there, only
some crumbs from a sugar cookie that Susie Littletail had been eating the
night before, when her uncle had told her a go-to-sleep story.

"Oh, I know what it was; it must have been my rheumatism that gave me the
pain!" said the old gentleman rabbit as he looked for his red, white and
blue crutch, striped like a barber pole. He found it under the bed, and
then he managed to limp to the window. Surely enough, the sun was shining.

"I'll certainly have to do something about this rheumatism," said Uncle
Wiggily as he carefully shaved himself by looking in the glass. "I guess
I'll see Dr. Possum."

So after breakfast, when Sammie and Susie had gone to school, Dr. Possum
was telephoned for, and he called to see Uncle Wiggily.

"Ha! Hum!" exclaimed the doctor, looking very wise. "You have the
rheumatism very bad, Mr. Longears."

"Why, I knew that before you came," said the old gentleman rabbit,
blinking his eyes. "What I want is something to cure it."

"Ha! Hum!" said Dr. Possum, again looking very wise. "I think you need a
change of air. You must travel about. Go on a journey, get out and see
strange birds, and pick the pretty flowers. You don't get exercise
enough."

"Exercise enough!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "Why, my goodness me sakes alive
and a bunch of lilacs! Don't I play checkers almost every night with
Grandfather Goosey Gander?"

"That is not enough," said the doctor, "you must travel here and there,
and see things."

"Very well," said Uncle Wiggily, "then I will travel. I'll pack my valise
at once, and I'll go off and seek my fortune, and maybe, on the way, I can
lose this rheumatism."

So the next day Uncle Wiggily started out with his crutch, and his valise
packed full of clean clothes, and something in it to eat.

"Oh, we are very sorry to have you go, dear uncle," said Susie Littletail,
"but we hope you'll come back good and strong."

"Thank you," said Uncle Wiggily, as he kissed the two rabbit children and
their mamma, and shook hands with Papa Littletail. Then off the old
gentleman bunny hopped with his crutch.

Well, he went along for quite a distance, over the hills, and down the
road, and through the woods, and, as the sun got higher and warmer, his
rheumatism felt better.

"I do believe Dr. Possum was right!" said Uncle Wiggily. "Traveling is
just the thing for me," and he felt so very jolly that he whistled a
little tune about a peanut wagon, which roasted lemonade, and boiled and
frizzled Easter eggs that Mrs. Cluk-Cluk laid.

"Ha! Where are you going?" suddenly asked a voice, as Uncle Wiggily
finished the tune.

"I'm going to seek my fortune," replied Uncle Wiggily. "Who are you,
pray?"

"Oh, I'm a friend of yours," said the voice, and Uncle Wiggily looked all
around, but he couldn't discover any one.

"But where are you?" the puzzled old gentleman rabbit wanted to know. "I
can't see you."

"No, and for a very good reason," answered the voice. "You see I have very
weak eyes, and if I came out in the sun, without my smoked glasses on, I
might get blind. So I have to hide down in this hollow stump."

"Then put on your glasses and come out where I can see you," invited the
old gentleman rabbit, and all the while he was trying to remember where he
had heard that voice before. At first he thought it might be Grandfather
Goosey Gander, or Uncle Butter, the goat, yet it didn't sound like either
of them.

"I have sent my glasses to the store to be fixed, so I can't wear them and
come out," went on the voice. "But if you are seeking your fortune I know
the very place where you can find it."

"Where?" asked Uncle Wiggily, eagerly.

"Right down in this hollow stump," was the reply. "There are all kinds of
fortunes here, and you may take any kind you like Mr. Longears."

"Ha! That is very nice," thought the rabbit. "I have not had to travel far
before finding my fortune. I wonder if there is a cure for rheumatism in
that stump, too?" So he asked about it.

"Of course, your rheumatism can be cured in here," came the quick answer.
"In fact, I guarantee to cure any disease--measles, chicken-pox, mumps and
even toothache. So if you have any friends you want cured send them to
me."

"I wish I could find out who you were," spoke the rabbit. "I seem to know
your voice, but I can't think of your name."

"Oh, you'll know me as soon as you see me," said the voice. "Just hop
down inside this hollow stump, and your fortune is as good as made, and
your rheumatism will soon be gone. Hop right down."

Well, Uncle Wiggily didn't like the looks of the black hole down inside
the stump, and he peered into it to see what he could see, but it was so
black that all he could make out was something like a lump of coal.

"Well, Dr. Possum said I needed to have a change of scene, and some
adventures," said the rabbit, "so I guess I'll chance it. I'll go down,
and perhaps I may find my fortune."

Then, carefully holding his crutch and his satchel, Uncle Wiggily hopped
down inside the stump. He felt something soft, and furry, and fuzzy,
pressing close to him, and at first he thought he had bumped into Dottie
or Willie Lambkin.

But then, all of a sudden, a harsh voice cried out:

"Ha! Now I have you! I was just wishing some one would come along with my
dinner, and you did! Get in there, and see if you can find your fortune,
Uncle Wiggily!" And with that what should happen but that big, black bear,
who had been hiding in the stump, pushed Uncle Wiggily into a dark closet,
and locked the door! And there the poor rabbit was, and the bear was
getting ready to eat him up.

But don't worry, I'll find a way to get him out, and in case we have ice
cream pancakes for supper I'll tell you, in the next story, how Uncle
Wiggily got out of the bear's den, and how he went fishing--I mean Uncle
Wiggily went fishing, not the bear.




STORY II

UNCLE WIGGILY GOES FISHING


At first, after he found himself shut up in the bear's dark closet, where
we left him in the story before this, poor Uncle Wiggily didn't know what
to think. He just sat there, on the edge of a chair, and he tried to look
around, and see something, but it was too black, so he couldn't.

"Perhaps this is only a joke," thought the old gentleman rabbit, "though I
never knew a black bear to joke before. But perhaps it is. I'll ask him."

So Uncle Wiggily called out:

"Is this a joke, Mr. Bear?"

"Not a bit of it!" was the growling answer. "You'll soon see what's going
to happen to you! I'm getting the fire ready now."

"Getting the fire ready for what; the adventure, or for my fortune?" asked
the rabbit, for he still hoped the bear was only joking with him.

"Ready to cook you!" was the reply. "That's what the fire is for!" and
the bear gnashed his teeth together something terrible, and, with his
sharp claws, he clawed big splinters off the stump, and with them he
started the fire in the stove, with the splinters, I mean, not his claws.

The blazing fire made it a little brighter in the hollow stump, which was
the black bear's den, and Uncle Wiggily could look out of a crack in the
door, and see what a savage fellow the shaggy bear was. You see, that bear
just hid in the stump, waiting for helpless animals to come along, and
then he'd trick them into jumping down inside of it, and there wasn't a
word of truth about him having sore eyes, or about him having to wear dark
spectacles, either.

"Oh, my! I guess this is the end of my adventures," thought the rabbit. "I
should have been more careful. Well, I wish I could see Sammie and Susie
before he eats me, but I'm afraid I can't. I shouldn't have jumped down
here."

But as Uncle Wiggily happened to think of Sammie Littletail, the boy
rabbit, he also thought of something else. And this was that Sammie had
put something in the old gentleman rabbit's valise that morning, before
his uncle had started off.

"If you ever get into trouble, Uncle Wiggily," Sammie had said, "this may
come in useful for you." Uncle Wiggily didn't look at the time to see
what it was that his nephew put in the valise, but he made up his mind he
would do so now. So he opened his satchel, and there, among other things,
was a long piece of thin, but strong rope. And pinned to it was a note
which read:

"Dear Uncle Wiggily. This is good to help you get out of a window, in case
of fire."

"My goodness!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, "that's fine. There the bear is
making a fire to cook me, and with this rope I can get away from it. Now
if there's only a window in this closet I'm all right."

So he looked, and sure enough there was a window. And with his crutch
Uncle Wiggily raised it. Then he threw out his satchel, and he tied the
rope to a hook on the window sill, and, being a strong old gentleman, he
crawled out of the window, and slid down the cord.

And Uncle Wiggily got out just as the bear opened the closet door to grab
him, and put him in the pot, and when the savage black creature saw his
fine rabbit dinner getting away he was as angry as anything, really he
was.

"Here! Come back here!" cried the bear, but of course Uncle Wiggily knew
better than to come back. He slid down the rope to the ground, and then he
cut off as much of the rope as he could, and put it in his pocket, for he
didn't know when he might need it again. Then, catching up his valise, he
ran on and on, before the bear could get to him.

It was still quite a dark place in which Uncle Wiggily was, for you see he
was underground, down by the roots of the stump. But he looked ahead and
he saw a little glimmer of light, and then he knew he could get out.

Limping on his crutch, and carrying his valise, he went on and on, and
pretty soon he came out of a dark cave and found himself on the bank of a
nice little brook, that was running over mossy, green stones.

"Ha! This is better than being in a bear's den!" exclaimed the old
gentleman rabbit. "My, I was so frightened that I forgot about my
rheumatism hurting me. That was an adventure all right, and Sammie was a
good boy to think of that strong cord. Now what shall I do next?"

Well, Uncle Wiggily sat down on the bank of the brook, and he looked in
the water. Then he happened to see a fish jump up to catch a bug, so he
said to himself:

"I guess I will go fishing, just for fun. But if I do happen to catch any
fish I'll put them right back in the water again. For I don't need any
fish, as I have some lettuce and cabbage sandwiches, and some
peanut-butter cakes, that Susie's mamma put up in a cracker-box for me."

Well, Uncle Wiggily looked in his valise, to make sure his lunch was safe,
and then, taking a bent pin from under his vest, he fastened it to a part
of the string Sammie had given him. Then he fastened the string to a pole,
and he was ready to fish, but he needed something to make the fishes
bite--that is, bite the pinhook, not bite him, you know.

"Oh, I guess they'll like a bit of sweet cracker," Uncle Wiggily thought;
so he put some on the end of the pin-hook, and threw it toward the water.

It fell in with a splash, and made a lot of little circles, like
ring-around the rosies, and the rabbit sat there looking at them, sort of
nodding, and half asleep and wondering what adventure would happen to him
next, and where he would stay that night. All of a sudden he felt
something tugging at the hook and line.

"Oh, I've got a fish! I've got a fish!" he cried, as he lifted up the
pole. Up out of the water with a sizzling rush flew the string and the
sweet cracker bait, and the next minute out leaped the big, savage
alligator that had escaped from a circus.

"Oh, ho! So you tried to catch me, eh?" the alligator shouted at Uncle
Wiggily.

"No--no, if you please," said the rabbit. "I was after fish."

"And I'm after you!" cried the alligator, and, scrambling up the bank, he
made a jump for Uncle Wiggily, and with one sweep of his kinky, scaly
tail he flopped and he threw the old gentleman rabbit and his crutch and
valise right up into a big tree that grew near the brook.

"There you'll stay until I get ready to eat you!" exclaimed the alligator,
as he stood up on the end of his tail under the tree, and opened his mouth
as wide as he could so that if Uncle Wiggily fell down he'd fall into it,
just like down a funnel, you know.

Well, the poor gentleman rabbit clung to the topmost tree branch,
wondering how in the world he was going to escape from the alligator. Oh,
it was a dreadful position to be in!

But please don't worry or stay awake over it, for I'll find a way to get
him down safely. And in the story after this, if the milkman doesn't leave
us sour cream for our lemonade, I'll tell you about Uncle Wiggily and the
black crow.




STORY III

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BLACK CROW


Let me see, where did I leave off in the last story? Oh! I remember. It
was about Uncle Wiggily Longears being up in the top of the tall tree, and
the alligator keeping guard down below, ready to eat him.

Well, the old gentleman rabbit was wondering how he could ever escape, and
he felt quite badly about it.

"I guess this is the end of my adventures," he said to himself. "It would
have been much better had I stayed at home with Sammie and Susie." And as
he thought of the two rabbit children he felt still sadder, and very
lonely.

"I wonder if Susie could have put anything in my satchel with which to
scare an alligator," thought Uncle Wiggily. "I guess I'll look." So he
looked, and what should he find but a bottle of toothache drops. Yes,
there it was, and wrapped ground it was a little note Susie had written.

"Dear Uncle Wiggily," she said in the note, "if you ever get the
toothache on your travels, this will stop it."

"Ha! That is very kind of Susie, I'm sure," said the rabbit, "but I don't
see how that is going to make the alligator go away. And, even if he does
go, I wonder how I'm to get down out of this tall tree, with my crutch, my
valise and my rheumatism?"

Well, just then the alligator got tired of standing on the end of his
tail, with his mouth open, and he began crawling around. Then he thought
of what a good supper he was going to have of Uncle Wiggily, and that
alligator said:

"I guess I'll sharpen my teeth so I can eat him better," and with that the
savage and unpleasant creature began to gnaw on a stone, to sharpen his
teeth. Then he stood up on the end of his tail once more, under the tree,
and opened his mouth as wide as he could.

"Come on now!" he called to Uncle Wiggily. "Jump down and have it over
with."

"Oh, but I don't want to," objected the rabbit.

"You'll have to, whether you want to or not," went on the alligator. "If
you don't come down, I'll take my scaly, naily tail, and I'll saw down the
tree, and then you'll fall."

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "What shall I do?"

Then he happened to think of the bottle of toothache medicine that he held
in his hand, and, taking out the cork, he dropped the bottle, medicine and
all, right into the open mouth of the alligator, who was again up on his
tail.

And the alligator thought it was Uncle Wiggily falling into his jaws, and
he shut them quickly like a steel trap and chewed on that bottle of hot
toothache drops before he knew what it was.

Well, you can just imagine what happened. The medicine was as hot as
pepper and mustard and vinegar and cloves and horse radish all made into
one! My! how it did burn that alligator's mouth.

"Oh my! I'm shot! I'm poisoned! I'm bitten by a mosquito! I'm stabbed! I'm
all scrambled up" cried the alligator. "Water, water, quick! I must have
water!"

Then he gave a big jump, and, with his kinkery-scalery tail, he leaped
into a big puddle of water, and went away down in under, out of sight, to
cool off his mouth.

"Oh, now is my chance! If I could only get down out of the tree!"
exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "But with my rheumatism I'm afraid I'll fall. Oh
dear! What shall I do?"

"Don't be afraid, I'll help you!" exclaimed a kind voice, and then the
voice went on: "Caw! Caw! Caw!" and Uncle Wiggily, looking up, saw a big
black crow perched on a limb over his head.

"Oh, how do you do!" spoke Uncle Wiggily, making a bow as well as he
could. "Can you really help me down?'

"Yes," said the crow, "I can. Wait until I get my market basket. I was
just going to the grocery, but I'm in no hurry. I'll save you first."